#summary This article describes the configuration preferences for tnic, and how to set them.

= Adaptive Configuration =

tnic is designed to run on a variety of platforms to accomplish its goal of
developer-friendly modular computation. As such, tnic is able to adapt, at
runtime, to many different hosting environments and persistence layers. 
Currently, tnic supports the following environments "out-of-the-box":
    * The Google App Engine
    * Linux + Tomcat + Java + MySQL
    * (coming soon) Linux + Apache + MySQL + PHP
For Java servlet environments such as the App Engine and Tomcat, tnic utilizes
the standard servlet init() method (per the Java Servlet API) to set
common configuration variables during runtime. Some of the settings that are
determined during runtime are:
    * The type of caching to utilize
    * How to start/manage threads
    * How to manage http connections
The system itself determines how to handle the above components during runtime.
In this way, tnic "adaptively" configures itself in many respects, lending
itself to easy portability to and from different systems and platforms. tnic can
also adaptively configure certain persistence layers, such as App Engine + JDO
and PHP + MySQL. Other persistence layers may require manual configuration, 
explained in detail in the "Manual Configuration" section below.

= Manual Configuration =

The primary things you will need to configure for your system manually:
    * Persistence Layer, if not officially supported
    * Load balancing policies *(required)*

== Persistence Layer ==

If you want or need to use a persistence layer other than the Google App Engine
or MySQL, you will need to write the bindings yourself. That is, you will need
to implement the *com.tnic.db.Datastore* interface for Java environments, or 
implement the *com.tnic.db.Datastore* object interface for PHP environments.

== Load Balancing Policies ==

tnic detects the resources and capacities of your system and constructs a load
balancing policy based on this information. If you would like to customize this
policy, reference the wiki article 'How to Configure tnic Policies'

